# University of Chittagong  
**Department of Computer Science and Engineering**  
**5th Semester B.Sc. (Engineering) Examination 2022**  

**Course Code:** CSE 517  
**Course Title:** Computer Architecture  
**Total Marks:** 54  
**Time:** 4:00 Hours  

**Answer any three questions from each section.**  
**[All parts of a question should be answered sequentially; figures in the right hand margin indicate full marks]**

## Section A

### 1.  
a) "Processing speed has increased more rapidly than memory access time". Justify this statement with an appropriate example.  
**3**

b) Which describes how computer system works? Why?  
**3**

c) "Intel Core i9 family shares the same organization"- Do you agree with this statement? If so why?  
**3**

### 2.  
a) State and explain the Moore's law and Amdahl's law with example.  
**2**

b) For instance execution time of a process is 100ms. It has three functions such as a, b and c. They occupied 70%, 20% and 10% execution time respectively. If b part is enhanced 30% and c part is enhanced 20%, find overall enhancement of the process.  
**4**

c) CPU clock cycles = Σi=1 n ICi × CPi. Elucidate this expression. Where the symbols have their usual meanings.  
**3**

### 3.  
a) Design an efficient computer for data science professionals. You can consider processing speed, memory design, cache design, storage capacity, RAID levels, GPU etc. Compare the performance of the newly designed computer with conventional standalone PC.  
**3.5**

b) Translate the following instructions into machine instructions:  
a) LW $t4, 400($s3)  
b) ADD $s0, $t1, $t2  
**2**

c) 

| Memory |        | CPU Registers |     |
|--------|--------|---------------|-----|
| 300    | 1940   | 300           | PC  |
| 301    | 5941   |               | AC  |
| 302    | 2941   |               | IR  |
| 940    | 0004   |               |     |
| 941    | 0003   |               |     |

In this example, three instruction cycles, each consisting of a fetch cycle and an execute cycle, are needed to add the contents of location 940 to the contents of 941. Show CPU register contents for all instruction cycles.  
**3.5**

### 4.  
a) Why we are not using one single fastest memory instead of using hierarchically designed memory system?  
**2**

b) What is the significance of using cache memory? Illustrate the cache read operation using diagram.  
**3**

c) Show that: $T_a = T_c + (1 - H)T_m$. Where the symbols have their usual meanings.  
**2**

d) What are the differences among sequential access, direct access, and random access?  
**2**

## Section B

### 5.  
a) $C_s = \frac{C_1 S_1 + C_2 S_2}{S_1 + S_2}$ Illustrate this expression. Show that $C_s \approx C_2$ provided $C_1 \gg C_2$. Show the result in a graph.  
**4**

b) Suppose cache size = 128KB, block size = 4KB, main memory size = 128MB. Find number of bits in tag and tag directory size.  
**4**

c) Distinguish between fully associative and set associative mapping.  
**1**

### 6.  
a) What are the differences among EPROM, EEPROM, and flash memory  
**3**

b) Write some features of DRAM and SRAM. What are the key functions of SDRAM, RDRAM and DDR memories?  
**4**

c) Briefly explain the possible approaches to cache coherency.  
**2**

### 7.  
a) Suppose data=1001110101, find hamming code. Also correct the error if the value of 8th bit position of the codeword has been changed.  
**4**

b) Write a program to evaluate the following expression.  

$$
X = \frac{A - B + C \times (D + E - F)}{G + H \times K}
$$

i) Using general register computer with three address instructions.  
ii) Using general computer with two address instructions.  
iii) Using accumulator type computer with one address instructions.  
iv) Using a stack organized computer with zero-address operation instructions.  
**3**

c) Briefly introduce different RAID levels.  
**2**

### 8.  
a) Distinguish between CISC and RISC computer.  
**2**

b) "The pipelined approach takes much less time"- show with an example.  
**2**

c) Three computers use register windows with the following characteristics. Determine the window size and the total number of registers in each computer.

|                      | Computer 1 | Computer 2 | Computer 3 |
|----------------------|------------|------------|------------|
| Global registers     | 10         | 8          | 16         |
| Local registers      | 10         | 8          | 16         |
| Common registers     | 6          | 8          | 16         |
| Number of windows    | 8          | 4          | 16         |

**3**

d) What do you know about pipeline hazards and stalls?  
**2**
